https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/11797/1/Darvill_and_Wainwright_2009_Stonehenge_Excavations_2008.pdf
→ https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/11797/1/Darvill_and_Wainwright_2009_Stonehenge_Excavations_2008.pdf
Content-Type: application/pdf

The Antiquaries Journal, 89, 2009, pp 1–19 r The Society of Antiquaries of London, 2009
doi:10.1017⁄s000358150900002x. First published online 21 April 2009
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008
Timothy Darvill, VPSA, and Geoffrey Wainwright, PSA
Timothy Darvill, Centre for Archaeology, Anthropology and Heritage, School of Conservation
Sciences, Bournemouth University, Poole BH12 5BB, UK. E-mail: tdarvill@bournemouth.ac.uk
Geoffrey Wainwright, March Pres, Pontfaen, Fishguard SA65 9TT, UK. E-mail: geoff@bluestone.
eu.com
The following paper is the first published account of an excavation that took place at Stonehenge
during April 2008. As this was the first excavation to take place within the stone circle for some forty
years, the excavation has attracted an uncommon degree of interest, hence its publication in the
Antiquaries Journal as an interim account of work in progress, in the form of an edited transcript of a
paper first given at the Ordinary Meeting of the Society of Antiquaries of London on 9 October 2008.
The paper explains that the 2008 excavation set out to date the construction of the Double Bluestone
Circle at Stonehenge and to chart the subsequent history of the bluestones and their use at the
monument. Evidence is presented for a provisional working date of around 2300 BC for the construction
of the Double Bluestone Circle, while it is argued that the history of the site is far more complex than
has been allowed for in existing interpretations, with a multiplicity of overlapping and intercutting
(though not continuous) events, including substantial late Roman, medieval and early modern
activity. The excavated material, and the evidence from the surviving stones, supports the suggestion
that bluestones were brought to the site because of their perceived special qualities, perhaps for their
supposed healing properties, and that some knowledge of those qualities remained current in later times
with the result that in excess of two-thirds of the original bluestone volume has now disappeared.
(GW) Mr Vice-President, Fellows, and guests, it is almost exactly forty years since I gave
my first paper to the Society of Antiquaries. My subject then was the excavations that
I had recently undertaken at Durrington Walls, in Wiltshire, which are now being
so wonderfully re-interpreted by the Stonehenge Riverside Project. I stood here again
two years ago with Tim Darvill, when we talked about our Preseli project in north
Pembrokeshire. This evening, we will continue that story, which will take us from the
Preseli Hills to Stonehenge. My job is to tell you how we made that journey. This is just to
refresh your memory, not so much about the detail of what we were doing in north
Pembrokeshire, but really to set the scene for what follows.
I shall remind you briefly about why Tim and I undertook research at Preseli in the
first place. I was watching a television programme about Stonehenge which ended with
four or five of my esteemed colleagues sitting around amongst the stones and wondering
why Stonehenge had been built. They looked at the stars, they looked at the ground, they
looked everywhere. But in the end, it was clear to me that the secret as to why Stonehenge
was built lay in the bluestones, the first stones to be erected at the site. They had been
brought from north Pembrokeshire to Stonehenge, and if one could find out why that was
so, one would have a lead into one of the reasons why Stonehenge was built – I say one of
the reasons because, quite clearly, it must have had a variety of functions.
So Tim and I went to Preseli. We worked there for six years or so in a very low-key
way. I shall just remind you of what we found. North Pembrokeshire is characterized by
outcrops of volcanic rock, which run east to west across it, from St Davids Head in the
west to Crymych in the east. Carn Ingli is one of the famous outcrops, crowned by a
wonderful stone-walled hill fort of indeterminate date – although it does have about
fifteen causeways across its rampart. And there is Carn Meini; Carn Meini is the plural for
a series of carns, or outcrops of volcanic rock. When I say Carn Meini or Carn Menyn
(they are interchangeable) I mean those outcrops of rock – the carns.
Carn Menyn is the largest outcrop at the west end of those carns (fig 1). The rock is
characterized by two things: first, it splits vertically into natural columns, so that if you
wanted to quarry the rock at Carn Menyn, you would pull it out of the parent material;
secondly, when the rock is fresh, it is of a blue colour with white inclusions. So the rock is
very characteristic, and only occurs around Carn Menyn; and it has been known since
about 1902 that the rock had been brought from Carn Menyn to Stonehenge, to build the
first stone monument.
Looking across the central area of Stonehenge, the Sarsen Circle stones stand at
the back, forming the outer ring, with the smaller bluestones in front (fig 2). While these
are all well known, it is extraordinary to recall that Carn Menyn, at the western end of the
bluestone trail, has never really been subjected to a proper published survey, despite its
obvious potential interest. Peter Grimes excavated a few sites in the area in the 1930s, and
my old friend Peter Drewett went there two or three years running with some students in
the 1980s, but never fully published the results.
When Tim and I started surveying, we found that the southern slopes of Carn Menyn
were littered with pillar stones, some of them seemingly broken in transit (fig 3). They
could be transposed to Stonehenge with no problem at all. The surveys showed that Carn
Fig 1. Outcrops of spotted dolerite at Carn Menyn, north Pembrokeshire.
Photograph: Timothy Darvill
2 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
Fig 2. Interior of Stonehenge looking north east, with the remains of the collapsed
south-western Trilithon in the foreground, the outer Sarsen Circle in the
background and elements of the Bluestone Oval and Bluestone Circle in between.
Photograph: Timothy Darvill
Fig 3. Broken pillar stone below Carn Menyn, north Pembrokeshire (2m scale).
Photograph: Timothy Darvill
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 3
Menyn was at the centre of a scatter of megalithic monuments. One is Bedd yr Afanc, a
simple passage grave excavated by my fellow Pembrokean, Professor Peter Grimes.
Elsewhere there are chamber tombs, cairns, stone circles, standing stones and stone pairs.
There is the Carn Menyn cairn, which sits at the western end of Carn Menyn itself. A
close survey showed that to be of passage-grave type, and the big circular cairn with a
large capstone in the middle is very interesting indeed. Then there are hilltop enclosures.
There is the famous site at Foel Drygarn, full of hut platforms, as well as the three great
cairns in the middle that give the hill its name. Foel Drygarn overlooks Carn Menyn and
has a lot more to tell us. Then there is Banc Du, at the eastern end of the Preselis. Here a
small excavation provided radiocarbon dates of about 3600 BC for the construction of the
enclosure. This is the first causewayed enclosure from west Wales with radiocarbon dates,
and it gives us a bit of the background that we were searching for.
Rock art is another new discovery, including a cup-marked stone that we found in the
Preselis just below Carn Menyn. We found that although rock art may not be common,
there is quite a bit of it. It is always the case with rock art that you find the first piece and
people find more. Dai Morgan Evans recently found a superb cup-marked stone at
St Non’s Chapel, St Davids Head. The springs that surround the foot of the Carn Meini
frequently have cup and ring marks at their heads – as, for example, at Carn Sian.
Elsewhere, spring heads are sometimes demarcated by cairns or standing stones. Stone
pairs also occur around the outlets from Preseli, on to the plain below. They might be
considered gateway sites – junctions between landscape zones, as for example at Waun
Lwyd. Mention must also be made of Bedd Arthur, a bluestone oval (fig 4) to the west of
Carn Menyn (which you can see in the background). It is a good illustration of the
moorland conditions that prevail up there. When compared with the oval setting of
bluestones in the later phases of Stonehenge the resemblance is fairly clear.
Fig 4. Oval stone setting at Bedd Arthur, north Pembrokeshire, looking southeastwards towards Carn Menyn. Photograph: Timothy Darvill
4 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
From all the abundance of evidence there we came up with the suggestion that the
bluestones were important because of their use in a healing process, and were brought to
Stonehenge for that reason.
But why did we want to go and dig at Stonehenge? We went there with two questions.
First: when did the bluestones arrive at Stonehenge for the construction of the Double
Bluestone Circle? We could not answer that question in Preseli, so we had to come to
Stonehenge to get the answer. Second: how were the bluestones treated after they arrived
at Stonehenge? What was the history of their use?
This is an appropriate moment to pay tribute to English Heritage for the sympathetic
way in which they viewed our application to excavate at Stonehenge. It was the first
excavation at Stonehenge for forty years, and we are most grateful to them for giving us
permission to do it. Thanks are also due to the BBC ‘Timewatch’ team and the Smithsonian for funding the excavation. We are most grateful for that, and for the unobtrusive
way in which they carried out their work. Thanks are also due to the University of
Bournemouth, Tim’s base, to Miles Russell, who did so much of the work, to Mike Allen,
who was an absolute stalwart in assisting us with the stratigraphy and other scientific
matters, and to Yvette Staelens, Debs Costen and Vanessa Constant for all their work on
site. It was not an easy site to work on, and we are most grateful to all of them.
Our trench was small, just 2.5m by 3.5m. It was chosen to extend one of the earlier
excavations. Atkinson’s backfill was visible from a high level, and from an early stage it
was clear that about two-thirds of the trench comprised relatively undisturbed ground.
The trench produced good relationships, although by the time we reached bedrock is
looked like a Gruye`re cheese. It is quite easily the most complex little trench that I have
ever worked in, a suitable moment for me to hand over to Tim who will tell you more
about what we found.
(TD) As Geoff has already indicated, our lecture is a preliminary statement. Postexcavation work is ongoing; material is coming in literally day after day; and there is
plenty more work still to go. So I am going to unfold for you only preliminary thoughts
about the interpretation of what is, as Geoff has said, a rather small hole; we sometimes
refer to it as a piece of keyhole surgery into this particularly important monument.
First, let us point out where exactly we dug. It was in the area between the Trilithons
and the outer ring, known as the Sarsen Circle, in the south-eastern sector of the
monument. A line of bluestones, the pillars of the Bluestone Circle, runs through this area
– I shall touch on these later – but the trench occupies an area currently free of stones. It
was intended to come down over the top of what is generally regarded as the first stone
monument on the site, usually referred to as the Double Bluestone Circle. Nothing of that
monument is visible on the surface today, and it was through ground-probing radar that
we managed to situate the trench so well over the edge of earlier trenches, extending work
that had already been done by Richard Atkinson and Colonel Hawley.
In plan it is easy to see that our target, the original Double Bluestone Circle, runs
more or less concentrically between the Sarsen Circle on the outside and the Bluestone
Circle; the great Trilithons are further towards the centre of the site again. No less
complexity applies to the matter of extending the existing trench because the edges of
Hawley’s 1924 excavation and Atkinson’s 1964 excavation were not exactly coincident,
which meant cutting back the original edges to provide a clean and clear look at what was
going on below the surface.
Looking across the trench when first cleared of turf and overburden, the previously
excavated areas were clear from their mixed refill (fig 5). Within this area we found rabbit
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 5
bones, mole bones and all the associated evidence of animal intrusions over the last fortyodd years. It is fair to say that analysis of the deposits in the virgin territory adjacent to the
edge of the original excavations revealed a degree of contamination running through into
the unexcavated area. It is important to think about the implications of this not just for
the interpretation of our findings but also the management of the site in future.
Fig 5. The 2008 excavation trench at Stonehenge following the removal of the turf.
Photograph: Timothy Darvill
6 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
The turf at Stonehenge is not terribly old; it was put down only twenty to twenty-five
years ago, perhaps with the incorporation of topsoil brought in from nearby. Removal of
the turf revealed the top of what is often referred to as the ‘Stonehenge Layer’ – something
which earlier excavators had a good look at, and which has caused a degree of difference
in the interpretations that have been placed on it. Some consider the content of it to be
largely the product of constructing Stonehenge; others see it in terms of the destruction of
Stonehenge. We shall come to think more about this problem in due course.
We treated the Stonehenge Layer as if it was a house floor. We took it down in spits that
were set out in 0.5m squares, so that we could measure spatially and vertically the distribution of material through that layer, recognizing that others had perhaps not paid much
attention to this in the past. We took it down in three spits, of which two extend right across
the trench and one only halfway across, because the layer is actually thicker on the eastern
side than on the west. At the base of the Stonehenge Layer we were able to define individual
cuts and edges coming through at this stage as colour-changes and differences in the texture
and compaction of the deposits themselves. No natural chalk was visible, and it was clear
that there had been extensive and intensive cutting and re-cutting.
At that point, we changed from a horizontal plano analysis to a feature-by-feature,
context-by-context analysis. Even at this depth there was evidence for animal activity and
one burrow was especially visible near the centre of the trench. Removal of the backfill
from Atkinson’s trench revealed a complicated section that, I am afraid, Richard Atkinson
looked at but never recorded (fig 6). In fairness, however, the plans he made of this trench
Fig 6. The 2008 excavation trench at Stonehenge following the removal of the
backfill from Atkinson’s 1964 trench; work has started on removing sample squares
from the Stonehenge Layer in the previously unexcavated area (1m scale).
Photograph: Timothy Darvill
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 7
matched exactly the material in the ground. They were very high-quality plans – there were
just no sections to go with them. We reinterpreted and recorded that section and sampled it
as a starting point, and then moved on to examine the undisturbed area beyond.
That was the process. What did we start to find? Well, the Stonehenge Layer itself
turned out to be quite a complicated set of deposits. It is a body of material that
has accumulated over quite a long time. Looked at in section it is quite mixed, and we
treated it, as I said, as a series of plano levels or spits that we could take apart. Work is
still progressing on the analysis of that material, but patterns are already beginning
to appear.
Looking at the geochemistry, for example, there are discrete concentrations across spit
1 of pH, magnetic susceptibility, copper, iron, phosphorous, magnesium and potassium,
all indicating various localized activities in that deposit. It implies quite small-scale and
discrete deposition of materials and events, even within the small area that we were
examining. Some of those things go right down through the Stonehenge Layer, and some
don’t. In the second spit, for example, we see that copper remains the same, while
magnetic susceptibility changes, and as we go down to the third level, again, some things
hold, some change. It thus seems that we have a whole series of overlapping and intercutting events within the Stonehenge Layer.
We are still taking that soil apart, and there is a good deal more to do, but we have a
series of artefacts from the Stonehenge Layer – for example, a traditional late Neolithic
asymmetrical arrowhead, a flint hammer that has been used for breaking up stones, two
iron wedges, which have also been used for breaking up stones (they are quite small
wedges) and a human tooth from immediately below the turf.
So, in summary, the Stonehenge Layer is a heterogeneous deposit some 350mm thick.
It has multiple localized spreads of material, with soil stabilization and worm sorting
going on. There is a lot of mixing, and a lot of disturbance in there. There is bluestone
and sarsen in quite some quantity. The bluestone outnumbers the sarsen numerically.
Both types of stone were scattered right through the deposit, but there are several localized concentrations of broken bluestone.
There is direct evidence of stone breaking in the Stonehenge Layer. The vast majority
of pieces constitute struck or deliberately detached flakes, rather than being simply
random bits of material. They accumulated, as far as we can tell, over a long period –
probably from prehistoric times onwards. Our provisional interpretation is that what we
are looking at is essentially stone robbing, the breaking up of the monument, over a long
period, rather than stone shaping before its construction. We will see as we go on with
further analysis of the material whether this interpretation holds up, but that seems to be
what we are seeing at the moment.
Below the Stonehenge Layer there are more than a dozen intercutting features (fig 7),
four of which lay wholly or partly within Atkinson’s trench, and those features match
Atkinson’s excavation plan very closely. The features to the south, including the extensions of those that he found, are the deposits that we excavated for the first time.
As we first looked at the material, analysed it and uncovered these features, it seemed
to us that it recorded a fairly straightforward phasing for Stonehenge with a fairly conventional sequence of events represented in the stratigraphy. To illustrate that, I shall
focus on what goes on in the south-western edge of the trench (fig 8). Stone 35a of the
Bluestone Circle stands at the western end of the section, Stone 10 in the Sarsen Circle
stands just outside the trench to the east. At the top of the section is the Stonehenge
Layer; below are the cuts for stone sockets and other features.
8 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
At the time of excavation it seemed to us that the stratigraphy represented the key
stages of Stonehenge in what seemed a very familiar pattern of development and evolution. We seem to have what is often called the Phase 2 postholes representing the remains
of timber structures at the bottom of the sequence, and it seemed to us that the stratigraphy of what followed accorded with what is published about these things. It seemed to
us that we could recognize the cut of a Q-Hole at Phase 3.1, in the conventional scheme of
things, which would be the first bluestone monument, with its original cut, and then a
series of other edges representing the extraction of the stone and the refilling of the feature
as a series of deposits.
That all seemed perfectly sensible, although the section of the Q-Hole did not compare
very well with other published sections of similar features elsewhere on the site. Then we
seemed to have – perfectly correctly – cutting through those features a socket for a pillar in
the Bluestone Circle (Stone 35a) relating to subsequent phases: 3.ii through to 3.vi. This
accorded nicely with the conventional wisdom. A cut on the east side of the trench we
considered to be the edge of the socket for Sarsen Stone 10, although it does not relate
stratigraphically to the Q-Hole. Again that fits quite well; and, for a little added interest, there
was another edge representing a cut through the Sarsen socket which is certainly later in date.
One important clue here was the presence of a Roman coin on the bottom of the feature.
So that all seemed fine, and we walked away from the site thinking that we’d basically
confirmed the conventional sequence; carbon samples in the bag; environmental samples
ready to roll; and we probably had smug looks on our faces when we left the site, thinking
that everything was sorted out.
Fig 7. The 2008 excavation trench at Stonehenge with the fills of all identified
features fully removed, looking south west (2m scale). Photograph: Timothy Darvill
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 9
Well, as often happens in archaeology, once you start to analyse the material, things
change rather drastically. The first analysis we did was to look at the magnetic susceptibility values for the deposits recovered from the cut features. This immediately revealed
much diversity in the magnetic susceptibility of adjacent deposits. Generally, the more
intense the susceptibility, the more human activity those deposits represent. It is rather
an oblique relationship, but none the less it provides a useful indicator. At Stonehenge
the magnetic susceptibility levels suggested the heterogeneity of deposits even within
single features.
We carefully selected fourteen samples for radiocarbon dating, from charcoal recovered from the flotation of the environmental samples and from bone from secure contexts.
We hoped that these would give us a good framework through the stratigraphic sequence,
allow us to test that sequence and enable us to develop further detailed dating programmes in due course. The samples were processed at the Oxford Radiocarbon
Accelerator and they do, indeed, provide a very robust framework for the interpretation of
the stratigraphy. They nicely confirmed the sequence, but show that the actual date of the
material recovered from some features is not quite what might be expected.
What we interpreted as the socket for Bluestone 35a seems to date to the early modern
period; it was probably recut in the sixteenth, seventeenth or eighteenth centuries, or
maybe more recently, perhaps in an effort to extricate the stone. There is one date of
3000–2900 BC, presumably referring to residual material, of which there was plenty in and
around Stonehenge at that time. Similar problems attach to material from the fill of the
Fig 8. Detail of the south-western section of the 2008 excavation trench at
Stonehenge, with Stone 35a to the right and Stone 10 just out of the picture, to the
left (1m scale). Photograph: Timothy Darvill
10 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
socket for Stone 10, the sarsen on the east side. Here again we seem to have recutting in the
period AD 1500–1960. And we also know that there was activity in the same area in Roman
times. Yet again, however, there is residual material in the fill of the recut that, in this case,
takes us back into the eighth millennium BC; that is the first material of that early date to have
come from Stonehenge itself and it adds considerably to the story of the place.
The upper fill of the Q-Hole (F12), already described, also seems to be medieval in
date. It is probable that the hole represented by these cuts was left open for a while as
animal activity has caused the contamination of the primary fills of the original feature. In
these primary fills there is certainly some residual material, as well as intrusive material,
but there is one sample that cannot be dismissed in this way, and that provided a
determination of c 2460–2200 BC. Luckily, that date hangs together well with a determination of 2800–2600 BC from F11, which is stratigraphically cut by the original part of
F12. Finally, to show how mixed up and messed up Stonehenge is, the human tooth that I
referred to earlier from just below the turf – and there is no evidence at all that this tooth
comes from Stonehenge, just that it was found in the turf at Stonehenge – comes out as
late Neolithic, at 2400–2200 BC.
So how on earth do we rationalize all that? Well, it is not quite as dire as it first looks.
There are certainly some original cuts here for the main stone sockets, but there is also
recutting that is probably related to robbing, and perhaps to antiquarian investigations of
the site. This is clearly an important new dimension to the archaeology of Stonehenge,
and one to which we will return later. If we look again at the Q-Hole as the focus of one of
our key questions about the site, we find that what we originally considered to be the
refilling of a pit to extract the bluestone in prehistory is undoubtedly a much later pit that
happened to cut into the earlier feature. Conveniently, the bottom fill of this recut,
context 28, has a number of bones from amphibians in it, the remains of small animals
that seem to have fallen in and stayed there. If the pit was open for a period of time, as the
environmental evidence suggests, it is not perhaps surprising that material migrated down
into the layers immediately below, through animal activity and bioturbation.
In this case, detailed analysis of the fills sheds light on the formation of the deposits –
the events that constitute the stratigraphic sequence – and provides an explanation of why
there is intrusive material deep in adjacent deposits. What it also shows is that, while the
published sections from earlier work at Stonehenge look very attractive and provide
the basis for a very tight sequence, when the fills are dated, some of those interesting
relationships are not all that they first seem.
With this in mind, let us turn to the sequence of deposits as revealed in our trench,
combining the stratigraphy and the dating together. I do not believe that what we have
found conforms to the standard conventional three-fold phasing of Stonehenge; rather I
think that things are much more fluid in the way they developed, although you can, if you
wish, put them into a rough three-stage order.
Starting at the bottom, stratigraphically and chronologically, we have a series of what
are generally called post-holes, although I shall show you why they are not post-holes in a
minute. As far as we can tell – and we have one dated example – these belong chronologically and stratigraphically to the earliest period of Stonehenge. We shall be going on
to test this with more of the material extracted from them in due course.
Let us look at a couple of examples. F15 is a stake-hole; it is nothing much more than
that. As with most stake-holes, there is not a lot in it. F13 is a bit more substantial: it has a
pretty homogenous fill and no indication of a post-pipe. F11 was better preserved and has
a radiocarbon date on material from it of 2880–2650 BC. There is no post-pipe visible and
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 11
it is hard to justify an interpretation as a post-hole. Either we are so low down in the
post-hole that the post-pipe does not survive, or it never was a post-hole in the first place.
The conventional interpretation of an early timber phase at Stonehenge represented
archaeologically by post-holes is not supported by the evidence that we have from our
trench, although that does not exclude the possibility of post-holes elsewhere in the site.
What we do have are early stake-holes and small circular pits.
So how do our early features fit together? We have a small amount of pine charcoal
residual in later deposits, which has given a date back to 7330–7070 BC; it tells us that pine
was growing in the area, that some of it was somehow burnt, and that some of the debris
from these fires found its way into the archaeological deposits we excavated. Sadly, it does
not tell us much more, but it perhaps opens the possibility of early features somewhere on
the site and reminds us of the three large post-holes and a pit of broadly similar date
discovered under what is now the Stonehenge car park. The earliest cut features in our
excavation comprise four pits and a stake-hole. They are not all necessarily of the same
date, but F11 is provisionally dated to 2880–2650 BC. Examination by Rob Ixer of samples
taken from these early features suggests that there are no bluestone fragments in these
fills, although sarsen and flint are present.
Let us now move on and look at the next set of features, which, in the conventional
wisdom of Stonehenge, would be the Q-Holes. These are the holes that are assumed to
have held the stones of the first bluestone circle. We have three running through our
trench. Q11 was completely excavated by Hawley and cleared out again by Atkinson, and
there was nothing left of its original fill. The second one, Q12, was more or less completely excavated in half-section by Atkinson, with the edge of his trench forming the
section line. As it turns out, however, the other half of it was completely cut away by a
feature that I shall talk about in a few minutes with the result that there was effectively
nothing left of this one either. That leaves us with the third, our F12, which was bisected
by our trench edge allowing us to excavate the northern half. It would be the hole for Q13
for those of you who have your I Spy Book of Stonehenge on your laps and are ticking off
the features as I talk about them. As I have already discussed, there is a radiocarbon
sequence through this feature, which includes numerous intrusive and residual components. The only date that cannot be rejected on these grounds is that of 2460–2200 BC,
and accordingly this one provides us with a working hypothesis for dating the initial
construction of this feature. We are not claiming that is the date, but it is our working
hypothesis, and we will come back to this sequence and look at obtaining more samples
that will refine our understanding of the stratigraphic sequence. I have discussed F12
already so I shall not dwell on it, but it is a fairly open feature and, perhaps, the sort of
thing that one or more bluestones could have been set within.
All the later features that we have – and I shall describe some in a minute – have
residual material in them that presumably comes from the earlier phases of Stonehenge.
That is to say that they cut through features of this period and, therefore, contain material
derived from the original fills. Here it is important to recognize that in that residual
collection there is a substantial amount of Beaker pottery. As Humphrey Case has argued,
Beaker pottery is critically important for understanding the Stonehenge sequence. One
sherd of Beaker, not the best-looking sherd in the world, came from F12, our putative
Q-Hole 13, and is associated with the radiocarbon date that I gave you earlier. Beaker
pottery is very much part of this section of the sequence.
In summary, what do we have from our early bluestone monument? Well, Q-Hole 11
was excavated by Hawley and later re-examined by Atkinson. There is nothing new to add
12 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
there. Q-Hole 12 was partly excavated by Atkinson and most of what he left was cut by a
later shaft; that was disappointing, although the shaft is important as we shall see in a
minute. Q-Hole 13 was half excavated by us in 2008. Despite much extensive later disturbance, we have a provisional working date for it of, let us say, around 2300 BC. There
are also associations with Beaker pottery, which seems proper, and accords very well with
what little else we know about the Double Bluestone Circle. We know that there were two
sherds of Beaker pottery, both comb-impressed, from the fill of Q-Hole 5, and one
radiocarbon date from a Q-Hole (which one is not known) on a piece of animal bone
which dates, as it happens, to about 2460–2040 BC, pretty much exactly the same period
as our date.
This late third millennium BC horizon for the first bluestone monument at Stonehenge
triangulates quite well with what we have elsewhere on the site, which is very comforting,
but it presents a number of difficulties with the conventional sequence for the rest of
Stonehenge, particularly the appearance of the Trilithons and the Sarsen Circle. However, I think that we have to ask ourselves whether that sequence is anywhere near right.
A very big question mark needs to be put over it in the light of what we can now see as the
need to be very cautious about the interpretation of stratigraphic cuts and the dates to
which those cuts might relate.
Let us move hastily along to the next period of Stonehenge, where three sockets relate
to stones that are still visible above the ground surface. Stone 35a and Stone 34 are both
part of the Bluestone Circle that is such a striking part of all the later phases of the
monument. Both stones are still above ground. Stone 35a is a massive block, but projects
only a few centimetres above ground level (fig 9). Petrologically speaking, this one is very
close to the material from Carn Menyn to which Geoff referred earlier. I think that you
can see straightaway that this is the natural patina on the rock and it has been smashed up
in relatively recent times, sufficient that no new patina has developed on the exposed
faces. As we shall see a little later, that is not surprising. But there it is in its place, going
down the best part of a metre into the ground.
The next one along is Stone 34. It is a beautiful stone that extends into the ground
more than a metre, so that less than one-third of it is sticking up above the ground and the
rest is now under the ground. You can also just make out a massive hole next to the stone,
which is partly filled with concrete, put there when Atkinson refilled the trench, probably
to give it support. It is fairly certain that when Atkinson was digging here Stone 34 was
loose and you could move it, and, given the size of the hole, there is no question that
material could get into the ground alongside that stone.
To the east is Stone 10, part of the Sarsen Circle. Unfortunately, its socket only
impinged on the trench enough to go down about halfway; we did not manage to get to
the very bottom of it, because the bottom must lie somewhere much nearer the stone. But
we have a certain amount of it and we could see the edge quite clearly.
In overview there is not much to say about this phase in our sequence; the bluestones
of the Bluestone Circle are in sockets up to a metre or so deep, much more than might be
expected from the relatively small size of the stones that are now above ground level. The
bluestones were set fairly close together, something that is especially marked when you see
the buried portions. As a result this ring of stones forms something like a wall that
subdivides the area between the Sarsen Circle and the Trilithons into two roughly concentric spaces. One feeling that we had when we were working at Stonehenge – and it is a
great delight to have been able to work inside the stones for two weeks and become really
quite familiar with them – is that everybody, including ourselves, tends to walk straight to
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 13
the centre of the circle when they go to visit it. Yet the area between the Trilithons and the
sarsen stones is, if you like, a corridor, or an ambulatory around the sacred precinct to use
a modern temple as a comparison. The ambulatory is quite broad, like a main street
running round the outside of Stonehenge, with a wall of bluestones up the middle
dividing it into two tracks. As you walk around this space you are looking into the central
area through a series of slits created between the stones of the Trilithons and the gaps
between. So while we tend to rush towards the middle of the monument, the business of
the site might actually have been in the peripheral area round the edge, where, perhaps,
more people could walk and look into the centre than we might first imagine.
So far, most of what I have said is an elaboration of what is already known about the
site but, as we come into later periods, we move into new territory. We have two features
which can reasonably be dated to the late Roman period, or perhaps soon after, on the
grounds of having coins and Roman pottery in them. One is best described as a shaft
and lies in the centre of our trench; of the other we have only part, but both of them
incorporate pieces of bluestone.
The smaller of the two is perhaps the end of a grave. I am not sure, but it is a very
square cut and the end of it is defined by a very laminated slab of bluestone. It is not the
spotted dolerite; it is a different kind of bluestone, but none the less part of the spectrum
of stones that have come to be known as bluestone. In the bottom there was a late fourthcentury AD coin, which we thank John Casey for identifying; it was presumably deposited
some time after that date.
Fig 9. Stone 35a following excavation of its socket and associated recuts. The scale
of the buried portion of this stone can be easily seen, as can traces of the way it has
been broken up and portions removed (1m scale). Photograph: Timothy Darvill
14 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
In the centre we found a shaft. Atkinson must have skimmed the edge of it in 1964, but
most of it lies within our trench. It is about 1.1m deep and has a very homogenous fill.
Right in the top there was a very fine block of bluestone, which Rob Ixer has provisionally
identified as a piece of very fine-grained siltstone or sandstone; geologically speaking, this
can be paralleled by a piece found in the cursus by J F S Stone some years ago. So we have
an interesting circulation of bluestone fragments; this is a substantial piece and all around
it is a scattering of flakes and smaller pieces, which have been broken off.
Fully excavated, the shaft is substantial and, of course, it chops out a lot of earlier
stratigraphy. In the bottom was a very strange piece, which some have likened to the phallic
stones found on Neolithic sites. Certainly it is a long, thin, spiky piece of natural flint
nodule. There was abundant Roman pottery from the fill and another late Roman coin on
the base. Also from the shaft came a substantial amount of animal bone – more than 400
pieces all together – which Mark Maltby has been working on. There are bones of sheep,
goat, pig, horse, dog, red deer, hare and rabbit, and two species of bird, fowl and wader.
So we now have structural evidence for the use of Stonehenge in Roman times – mainly
in the late fourth century or a little later – with the shaft for sure, and perhaps a pit or a
grave against one of the sarsen stones as well. We have bluestone incorporated in both those
structures, suggesting that, during this time, pieces of the bluestones around Stonehenge
and within it were being broken off and used in the construction of these features. We might
note that earlier excavations recovered some twenty other Roman coins, half of which are
also of fourth-century date. There are 1,857 sherds of Roman pottery from previous
excavations, and at least seven items of Roman metalwork. All together, then, there is a
substantial collection of material; in the past this has been interpreted as being from Roman
picnickers; now perhaps we need to rethink what this material really means for the use of
the site as a place of ritual or ceremony in the first millennium AD.
Next in the sequence we have a series of post-Roman cuts into those earlier features.
Around both bluestones and the sarsen there are pits and hollows dug against the stone,
partly obliterating the original edges of the sockets in which these stones stand. The dates
span the period from AD 1250 through to the 1960s.
This was quite an industry and involved medieval and post-medieval people cutting
and chipping away at the stones. Stone 35a is a classic example of medieval robbing. But
what were they were trying to do here? From the cracks in the rock and the way it is
broken, I suggest that someone was trying to lever it out of the ground. They probably
gave up and just smashed the top off and took away what they could.
Over on the eastern side of the trench is a Roman cut with later, medieval, cuts around
about. Many of these later cuts originate at quite a high level, probably just within the
base of the Stonehenge Layer. It is at that same horizon that the block of very fine-grained
siltstone or sandstone that I have already mentioned was found, at the very top of the
shaft with its spread of flakes all around. Throughout these fills and the lower parts of the
Stonehenge Layer we find abundant scatters of flakes of bluestone, and lesser quantities
of sarsen.
From our post-Roman activity, in the eighth and ninth centuries AD there are sure
signs of cultivation in the area in the form of cereal grains from deposits at Stonehenge.
Two of the radiocarbon dates of this period are determinations made on cereal grains. We
also know that there was activity around Bluestone 35a, perhaps between 1600 and 1960.
There is holly and oak charcoal dating to a period between AD 1500 and 1960 in the socket
of sarsen Stone 10 in the outer Sarsen Circle. The post-Roman evidence also has
implications for the management of the monument: the radiocarbon dates suggest that
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 15
recent and potentially very modern material is finding its way into otherwise secure
archaeological contexts.
One curious fact emerging from the initial analysis of the charred plant remains is that
holly is represented in the charcoal sequence from early prehistoric times through to
recent times. There are four radiocarbon dates on holly charcoal – one each from the later
Neolithic and the early Bronze Age, and then two from medieval and recent times. That is
curious, because holly is not a common wood on other prehistoric sites in Wessex, and the
charcoal assemblage as a whole suggests that we may be dealing with something rather
unusual in the range of woods taken to Stonehenge. We might ask why those species of
wood were being burnt at or near Stonehenge.
So how do these new findings come together? How do they address the questions that
formed the major research focus of our work? What we have found both endorses and
challenges some of the long-cherished ideas about the site. First, we now have to put quite a
big question mark on many aspects of the conventional Stonehenge sequence. That is not to
say that they are wrong; it is simply to say that we need to go back and look carefully at the
stratigraphic sequences, not just focusing on the cutting and intercutting, with which we are
tolerably familiar, but asking when some of those cuts might have occurred and what events
they relate to. Their chronology is as important as their sequence in working out what is
going on. Therefore, when we go back to look at these things, we cannot necessarily just
accept the cut as a cut; we need to know when the cut occurred to know how it might fit in
with the overall sequence, and what its impact might have been on earlier relationships.
A second point is that many of the later features seem to have a much darker fill than
the earlier ones. There is work to be done looking again at the reports on earlier excavations to review the recorded colour/texture of features. This may result in a clearer
picture of post-prehistoric activity at Stonehenge.
Our work also shows that the site is very mixed – there is no question of that. The way
in which Stonehenge has been looked after in the past 400 or 500 years has meant that
things have gone down holes in the ground, that animals have taken material down, and
that, when features have been left open for a period, contamination has penetrated to
quite deep levels in the ground. Therefore we need to be extraordinarily careful about
those samples, and we need to know about the medieval samples just as much as we need
to know about the prehistoric ones in order to understand the stratigraphy.
As for the date of the Double Bluestone Circle, our working hypothesis is that it was built
about 2300 BC. Such a date accords nicely with associations with early to middle styles of
Beaker pottery, and coincides with quite a lot of other things happening in the landscape
around at that time. The remodelling of Stonehenge through the construction of the Double
Bluestone Circle – with its axial orientation towards the mid-summer sunrise to the north
east and the mid-winter sunset to the south west – was a very important event in the history
of Stonehenge and something that gives the site its unique character.
Understanding the Stonehenge Layer and the history of the bluestones is something
that we have extended considerably through this excavation. We can now see that the
Stonehenge Layer is a very complicated deposit, representing many separate events and
stand-stills. We currently see its formation as being more closely connected with the
destruction of the monument than its construction, but that is something that we will be
working on further as the geological and chemical evidence comes to bear on what we see.
We might ask ourselves finally how this relates to what has become known as
the ‘Healing Hypothesis’ which Geoff and I have spent some time evangelizing over in
the past months. We are still resolute in our belief that it is the bluestones – or at least the
16 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
meaning and importance attached to them by prehistoric people – that hold the key to
understanding why Stonehenge became the great monument it is. That remains at the
centre of our thinking. We are also resolute in the idea that both in Pembrokeshire and in
Wiltshire oral tradition and folklore from the last 500 years at least shows that people
Fig 10. Stone 34 adjacent to the 2008 excavation area, showing flake-beds resulting
from the removal of substantial pieces of stone, perhaps in later prehistoric or
Roman times (0.5m scale). Photograph: Timothy Darvill
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 17
believed that the stones and the springs and water associated with them had magical
powers capable of healing the sick and infirm. We think that such an understanding
extends back into prehistoric times.
Bluestones at Stonehenge were clearly broken up in later prehistoric times, and in
Roman and medieval times this became quite an industry. The bluestones were differentially
selected for removal. As Paul Ashbee once noted, almost all the sarsen stones are still there,
but something in excess of two-thirds of the bluestones have disappeared. Close examination
of the bluestones at Stonehenge reveals the presence of large flake-beds on the stones where
rock has been detached (fig 10). In the case of Stone 35a almost all the rock that originally
protruded above ground was removed. Such removals contribute not to the shaping of the
stones but to the removal of pieces for use elsewhere. Clearly, stone removal was happening
in post-prehistoric times and continued down into more recent times.
What we have from the medieval period back into Roman times from our excavations
begins to provide a bridge back into prehistory. One criticism that has been levelled at the
use of Geoffrey of Monmouth’s History of the Kings of Britain as a source relevant to
understanding Stonehenge – and to the fact that the stones were believed to have healing
properties – is that he was writing long after the monument had ceased to be used. What
we have unfolded here is the beginnings of an archaeological bridge that takes us back
from modern times into prehistory. Although the sequence of activities on the site is not
continuous, there is, at the very least, a series of marker points along the way that provide
a context for the oral transmission of memories over quite long periods of time.
I hope that what we have shown in this brief paper is that Stonehenge can no longer be
considered simply as a prehistoric site. It clearly had a much longer life than its architecture and prehistoric associations might suggest. Our work raises as many questions as it
answers, but it is equally clear that we need to look at the monument in a much wider
perspective than we have hitherto.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Interim reports on the Strumble-Preseli Ancient Communities and
Environment Study (SPACES) project include:
Darvill, Tand Wainwright, G 2002a. ‘StrumblePreseli Ancient Communities and Environment Study (SPACES): first report 2002’,
Archaeol Wales, 42, 17–28
Darvill, T and Wainwright, G 2002b. ‘SPACES
– exploring Neolithic landscapes in the
Strumble-Preseli area of southwest Wales’,
Antiquity, 76, 623–4
Darvill, T, Morgan Evans, D and Wainwright,
G 2003. ‘Strumble-Preseli Ancient Communities and Environment Study (SPACES):
second report 2003’, Archaeol Wales, 43, 3–12
Darvill, T and Wainwright, G 2003a. ‘A cupmarked stone from Dan-y-Garn, Mynachlog
Ddu, Pembrokeshire, and the prehistoric rock
art from Wales’, Proc Prehist Soc, 69, 253–64
Darvill, T and Wainwright, G 2003b. ‘Stone
circles, oval settings and henges in southwest Wales and beyond’, Antiq J, 83, 9–45
Darvill, T, Morgan Evans, D and Wainwright, G
2005. ‘Strumble-Preseli Ancient Communities and Environment Study (SPACES):
third report 2004’, Archaeol Wales, 44,
104–9
Darvill, T, Morgan Evans, D, Fyfe, R and
Wainwright, G 2006. ‘Strumble-Preseli
Ancient Communities and Environment
Study (SPACES): fourth report 2005’,
Archaeol Wales, 45, 17–23
Darvill, T, Davies, R V, Morgan Evans, D, Ixer,
R A and Wainwright, G 2007. ‘StrumblePreseli Ancient Communities and Environment Study (SPACES): fifth report 2006’,
Archaeol Wales, 46, 100–7
Darvill, T and Wainwright, G 2008. ‘Beyond
Stonehenge: Carn Meini and the Preseli
Bluestones’, Heritage in Wales, Spring 2008,
15–19
18 THE ANTIQUARIES JOURNAL
Accounts of the ‘Healing Hypothesis’ can be found in:
Darvill, T 2006. Stonehenge: the biography of a
landscape, Stroud: Tempus
Darvill, T 2007. ‘Towards the within: Stonehenge and its purpose’, in Cult in Context:
reconsidering ritual in archaeology (eds D A
Barrowclough and C Malone), 148–57,
Oxford: Oxbow Books
A website relating to the BBC ‘Timewatch’ programme featuring the 2008
excavations can be seen at:
/http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/programmes/
stonehenge/S (19 Feb 2009)
Reportage on the excavation and on the Preseli project, with further pictures
and information can found at:
Alexander, C 2008. ‘If the stones could speak.
Searching for the meaning of Stonehenge’,
Nat Geographic, 213.6 (June), 34–59
Catling, C 2007. ‘Message in the Stones’, Curr
Archaeol, 18.8 (issue 212), 12–19
Jones, D 2008. ‘New light on Stonehenge’,
Smithsonian, 39.7 (Oct), 36–46
Pitts, M 2008. ‘Stonehenge’, Brit Archaeol, 102
(Sept/Oct), 13–17
Marziou, A-F and Cranc¸on, S 2008. ‘Stonehenge: La fin d’une e´nigme?’, Arche´ologia,
460 (Nov), 17–28
Selkirk, A 2008. ‘Stonehenge revealed’, Curr
Archaeol, 19.3 (issue 219), 12–16
RE´ SUME´
L’article suivant est le premier compte rendu publie´ de
fouilles qui ont e´te´ effectue´es a` Stonehenge pendant le mois
d’avril 2008. Etant donne´ qu’il s’agissait des premie`res
fouilles effectue´es a` l’inte´rieur du cromlech depuis une
quarantaine d’anne´es, ces fouilles ont suscite´ un tre`s grand
inte´reˆt, d’ou` leur publication dans la revue Antiquaries
Journal, en tant que compte rendu provisoire des travaux en
cours, sous la forme d’une transcription e´dite´e d’une
communication pre´sente´e en premier lieu lors de la re´union
ordinaire de la ‘Society of Antiquaries of London’ [Socie´te´
des Antiquaires de Londres] le 9 octobre 2008. Cette
communication explique que les fouilles de 2008 avaient
pour but de dater la construction du double cromlech de
pierres bleues de Stonehenge et de tracer l’historique
ulte´rieur des pierres bleues et leur utilisation dans le
monument. Des indices sont pre´sente´s a` l’appui d’une date
de travail provisoire d’environ 2300 avant J.-C. pour la
construction du double cromlech de pierres bleues, et on
soutient que l’histoire du site est bien plus complexe que ne
le pre´tendent les interpre´tations existant de´ja`, avec de
nombreux incidents (non continus) de chevauchements
et de recoupements, y compris d’importantes activite´s de la
fin de la pe´riode romaine, de la pe´riode me´die´vale et du
de´but des temps modernes. Le mate´riel retrouve´ lors des
fouilles, ainsi que les indices tire´s des pierres restant encore,
appuient la the´orie que les pierres bleues avaient e´te´
transporte´es au site a` cause des qualite´s spe´ciales perc¸ues
en elles, peut-eˆtre pour les proprie´te´s curatives dont elles
e´taient cense´es eˆtre dote´es, et que des connaissances
concernant ces proprie´te´s existaient encore par la suite, ce
qui a eu pour re´sultat la disparition a` ce jour de plus des
deux tiers du volume de pierre bleue originel.
ZUSAMMENFASSUNG
Die folgende Abhandlung ist die erste Vero¨ ffentlichung
u¨ber eine archa¨ologische Ausgrabung in Stonehenge, die
im April 2008 stattfand. Da sie seit 40 Jahren die erste
Ausgrabung innerhalb des Steinkreises war, hatte sie
ungewo¨hnlich viel Aufmerksamkeit auf sich gelenkt. Aus
diesem Grund wird dieser, zuna¨chst vorla¨ufige, Bericht
im Antiquaries Journal vorgelegt, und zwar in Form einer
bearbeiteten Niederschrift eines Vortrags, der bei einer
Versammlung der ‘Society of Antiquaries’ am 9. Oktober
2008 in London gehalten wurde. Das Thema dieser
Ausgrabung war die Datierung des doppelten Kreises aus
Blausteinen, die Entwicklungsgeschichte der Blausteine
und deren Gebrauch als Teil dieses Monuments. Ein
provisorisches Datum von 2300 v. Chr wird fu¨r die
Errichtung des Doppelsteinkreises aus Blaustein liegt vor,
und es wird argumentiert, daß die Entwicklungsgeschichte dieser Sta¨tte viel komplizierter ist, als aus
bisherigen Interpretationen hervor geht. Die Entwicklung
wurde von einer Vielfalt von u¨bernandergreifenden und
verschachtelten (aber nicht kontinuierlichen) Ereignissen
gepra¨gt, insbesondere spa¨tro¨mische, mittelalterliche und
neuzeitliche Aktivita¨ten. Die Fundstu¨cke und die Beweismaterialien von den Steinu¨berresten unterstu¨tzen die
These, daß die Blausteine wegen ihrer wahrgenommenen
besonderen Qualita¨ten antransportiert wurden, vielleicht
wegen angeblicher heilerischen Eigenschaften. Das
Wissen um solche Qualita¨ten blieb bis in spa¨tere Zeiten
erhalten, was zur Folge hatte, daß mehr als zweidrittel der
urspru¨nglichen Blausteine jetzt verschwunden sind.
STONEHENGE EXCAVATIONS 2008 19