Archaeology International
Research Articles and Updates
Archaeology and legend: investigating Stonehenge
Mike Parker Pearson

How to cite: Parker Pearson, M. 'Archaeology and legend: investigating Stonehenge'. 
Archaeology International, 2021, 24 (1), pp. 144-64
DOI: https://doi.org/10.14324/111.444.ai.2021.09
Published: 30 December 2021
CC-BY 4.0 Open Access
Source: https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10187084/1/ai-1207-parker%20pearson.pdf

Abstract
Stonehenge is one of the world's most famous prehistoric monuments, built 4,500-5,000 years ago during the Neolithic in a time long before written history. The recent dramatic discovery of a dismantled stone circle near the sources of some of Stonehenge's stones in southwest Wales raises the fascinating possibility that an ancient story about Stonehenge's origin, written down 900 years ago and subsequently dismissed as pure invention, might contain a grain of truth. This article explores the pros and cons of comparing the legend with the archaeological evidence.

Keywords: Neolithic, Stonehenge, stone circles, Britain, legend

[Full 20-page article extracted — see source URL for original PDF]

Introduction
Myths and legends have always inspired archaeologists and adventurers: Homer's Iliad in the search for Troy; the legend of King Arthur in the search for Camelot; or the Greek myth of Minos and the Minotaur's labyrinth in the discovery of Knossos. Often the myth proves elusive, as in the fruitless search for Eldorado's city of gold or the quest for Prester John's fabled lost kingdom. The complex relationship between archaeology and ancient legend is fraught with difficulties. What legends, if any, may be considered true? Might some contain only a kernel of truth, fortuitously resistant to the erosive sands of time? Or are they merely the vestiges of ever-changing stories from a bygone age that were intended only to entertain and moralise, and not to bear witness?

One of the earliest recorded tales of ancient Britain relates to the building of Stonehenge. Written by Geoffrey of Monmouth in about 1136, just six years or so after the very first documentary reference to Stonehenge by Henry of Huntingdon, it is a lengthy account of how Merlin the wizard organised, on behalf of Aurelius Ambrosius, the building of this great monument - supposedly a memorial for the fallen - by taking megalithic stones from a previous stone circle in Ireland. This story is found in Historia Regum Britanniae (The History of the Kings of Britain, also known as De Gestis Britonum [On the Deeds of the Britons]), written by a cleric, Geoffrey of Monmouth (Galfridus Monemutensis). Although its title seemingly promised an accurate presentation of facts, it can best be described as a pseudo-history in which a few reliable historical facts are sprinkled among a morass of uncorroborated fictions and false claims (Wright 2007). Geoffrey's work may be better considered as a political statement to demonstrate the unity of Britain rather than an objective historical account (Flood 2016).

Although Geoffrey drew on a number of identifiable historical sources, including Gildas, Bede and supposedly 'a very old book in the British tongue', much of his writing is thought to have come from his own imagination. As early as 1190, William of Newburgh was claiming that most of Geoffrey's history relating to the time of Merlin and King Arthur was made up, partly by Geoffrey and partly by others (Chippindale 1994, 24). The passages that relate to Stonehenge (which he names as Stanheng; Wright 2007, 180) have no antecedent in any earlier writings, so the account's lack of historical pedigree places it in the category of 'fake' history unless proved otherwise. During the twentieth century scholars mused on whether any aspect of it might be true, with varying degrees of confidence in its possible veracity (Hibbard Loomis 1930; Piggott 1941). So why should we pay any attention to this story? What could it contain that might possibly relate to the purpose of Stonehenge? But, first, what does Geoffrey's story actually say about Stonehenge?

The legend of Merlin and Stonehenge
According to Geoffrey, Stonehenge's origins lay in a time of conflict between Britons and invading Saxons in the aftermath of Roman rule. During a parlay at 'Ambrius' (Amesbury, close to the site of Stonehenge), 460 British aristocrats are treacherously murdered by King Hengist and his Saxons, carrying daggers under their clothes. Sometime later, the British king Aurelius Ambrosius replaces the previous king, Vortigern, unites the armies of Britain and defeats the Saxons. Wanting an everlasting memorial to the Britons killed at Mount Ambrius, he calls upon Merlin to devise a suitable monument. Merlin decrees that it should be built out of Chorea Gigantum (the Dance of the Giants/Giants' Dance/Giants' Ring), a circle of enormous stones on the mountain of Killaraus in Ireland. 'If you set them up in the same pattern around the burial-place, they will stand forever' (Wright 2007, 172). According to Merlin, they had been erected by giants who used them for their magical and medicinal properties; whenever they fell sick, they set up baths among them, washed the stones and poured the water in the baths to be cured. It is these mystical stones that Merlin wants for his design of Stonehenge.

Merlin and the king's brother Uther Pendragon take 15,000 men to Ireland, defeat the Irish army and dismantle the stones, shipping them back to England and setting them up around the Britons' burial place at Mount Ambrius in the same manner as they had been in Ireland. As well as memorialising the British fallen, Stonehenge becomes the burial place first of Aurelius Ambrosius and then Uther Pendragon, father of King Arthur, the heroic war-leader of legend. The final royal burial at Stonehenge is Arthur's successor Constantinus, supposedly around 542 ce.

There are clearly major impediments to assuming that this story is in any way true. Stonehenge was built in the third millennium bce and not in the 400s ce when Britons fought Saxons. Nor was there an ancient race of giants. And nor do Stonehenge's stones come from Ireland. Yet there are niggling questions that hint at possible grains of truth buried in this medieval legend. Among the remaining stones of Stonehenge are 43 'bluestones' which derive from the Preseli hills of southwest Wales, 275 km from Salisbury Plain. Might these somehow relate to the legend's account of a distant origin in Ireland?

Of the hundreds of Britain's stone circles, only Stonehenge is composed of stones that have travelled a great distance. This fact could not have been known before the advent of the modern science of geology. Is it actually possible that knowledge of its distant sources was passed down by word of mouth over some 4,000 years from prehistory to Geoffrey's time? The question is even more pertinent when we consider that Pembrokeshire, the region of southwest Wales from which the bluestones derive, may well have been considered in the post-Roman and early medieval period to be part of Ireland. Irish kings were believed to have ruled this region in the centuries before Geoffrey's time, up to the end of the eleventh century (Davies 1982, 87-8, 95; 1990, 39), the area having been settled by the Irish probably from 400 ce onwards (Davies 1982, 88). Yet this attribution is problematic; within a few pages of his story of the Dance of the Giants, Geoffrey talks of St David's in Pembrokeshire as being in Wales and not Ireland.

While Geoffrey's identification of Ireland as the source of Stonehenge's stones may be broadly compatible with the bluestones' origin in the Preseli hills of Pembrokeshire, there is no evidence for the existence anywhere of a Mount Killaraus (later referred to in William Caxton's Chronicle of England of 1480 as 'the mounte of kylyon'; Chippindale 1994, 25). So can the archaeological evidence help us further?

Archaeological evidence
Although antiquarians and archaeologists have studied Stonehenge for over 300 years, it is only recently that much attention has been paid to Geoffrey's story. In 2008 Timothy Darvill and Geoffrey Wainwright carried out an excavation at Stonehenge, developing their theory that Stonehenge had been built as a place of healing, drawing on one particular aspect of the tale (Darvill and Wainwright 2009, 16-18). They considered the bluestones to have arrived at Stonehenge around or after 2500 bce, linking their presence with nearby burials of people with unusual injuries (Darvill 2007). One of these was the Amesbury Archer, a Beaker migrant of 2480-2280 bce from continental Europe with a damaged knee (Fitzpatrick 2011). Two others were Early Bronze Age people (c. 2000 bce) whose skulls had been trepanned - suffering holes cut into their skulls - perhaps as a cure for illness.

The healing theory is not without problems. Excavations at Stonehenge in 2008 by a second team, the Stonehenge Riverside Project, produced evidence that the bluestones had been erected much earlier, during its first stage in 2995-2900 bce (Parker Pearson et al. 2020, 168, 536), and that the monument had been used as a large cemetery from this time onwards for the next 300-600 years (Parker Pearson et al. 2009; 2020, 539-43; Willis et al. 2016). The burials with unusual injuries were most likely 600-1,000 years later than the arrival of the supposed 'healing' bluestones, which had in fact adorned a burial ground - a place of the dead rather than a place of healing. More appropriately, the motive of healing and curing fits well with the medieval ecclesiastical mindset. For example, just a few pages later in his History, Geoffrey twice refers to healing waters in contexts other than the Giants' Dance (Wright 2007, 115, 116). The claim that water splashed on stones of the Giants' Dance had healing properties is more likely to be an anachronistic fancy in the same way as the erroneous post-Roman date of Stonehenge.

Darvill and Wainwright had been searching since 2002 for the source of the bluestones in the Preseli hills of southwest Wales, the area identified by the geologist Herbert Thomas a century earlier (Thomas 1923). 'Bluestone' is a catch-all term for a variety of Stonehenge's monoliths, used to distinguish these small pillars from sarsens - the huge silcrete blocks that comprise the majority of Stonehenge's stones and most likely derive from West Woods, 24 km to the north (Parker Pearson 2016; Nash et al. 2020). Bluestones are actually a variety of rock types: spotted dolerite, unspotted dolerite, rhyolite, volcanics and sandstone. All derive from on and around the Preseli hills except for the sandstone Altar Stone, which comes from an as yet unidentified source.

In 2011 geologists Richard Bevins and Rob Ixer published their identification of an impressive rocky outcrop at Craig Rhos-y-felin, just north of the Preseli hills, as a source of one of the types of rhyolite at Stonehenge. Two years later their geochemical analysis sourced spotted and unspotted dolerite stones from Stonehenge to two less spectacular outcrops in these hills, one at Carn Goedog and the other at Cerrigmarchogion. This was something of a bombshell because, ever since Thomas's time, archaeologists had been focused on a different location, the impressive outcrop of Carn Menyn or Carn Meini; yet none of Stonehenge's bluestones in the new analysis matched the geology of this more prominent outcrop.

Armed with the geologists' dramatic discoveries, the Stonehenge Riverside team began investigations of the rhyolite and spotted dolerite sources at Craig Rhos-y-felin and Carn Goedog respectively. For the next five years, as part of the Stones of Stonehenge project, we carried out excavations at the two outcrops. Both sites produced evidence of human activity, from the Mesolithic (8000-4000 bce) to the medieval period, but especially from the Neolithic period in the centuries before and around 3000 bce, just before the installation of bluestones at Stonehenge. This Neolithic evidence included stone tools and quarrying installations - gaps in the rock where pillars had been removed, artificial stone platforms onto which monoliths had been lowered and a trackway leading from the foot of one of the loading platforms.

Waun Mawn: a dismantled stone circle
We had investigated the standing stones of Waun Mawn in 2011, carrying out geophysical surveys around the stones to see if their curving arrangement was due to their being remnants of a mostly demolished stone circle. This had been the interpretation of archaeologists a hundred years before, although later archaeologists had been sceptical of this interpretation. Disappointingly, our magnetometer and resistivity surveys yielded no trace of buried stoneholes to indicate that the arc of stones had originally formed part of a complete circle.

With a last throw of the dice, we returned to Waun Mawn in 2017, this time with spades and shovels. Excavating beyond the ends of the arc, we uncovered two stoneholes that had once held standing stones, although the stones themselves were long gone. It was clear that the geophysical surveys in 2011 had not worked on the difficult terrain, so in 2018 we brought in teams of geophysicists who tried the full range of methods, including ground-penetrating radar and electromagnetic induction. With no positive results from any of the methods, even where we knew there were stoneholes, it was now clear that the poor magnetic and conductive properties of the underlying glacial drift were contributing to this problem.

We returned to Waun Mawn in September 2021 with a team of staff, volunteers and students from UCL and the universities of Southampton and Bournemouth. In just three weeks of excavation by hand we discovered another four stoneholes, revealing that the surviving stones had indeed once been part of a stone circle 110 m in diameter, making it the third largest stone circle in Britain. The stoneholes were not particularly deep, but each bore at its base the imprint of the standing stone that had formerly stood in it.

Two of the stoneholes were different to the others. These were both on the northeast side of the circle and had no packing stones. What was most unusual about these two stoneholes was the direction of their axis. Instead of having their long sides facing inwards to the centre of the circle, they were perpendicular to it. We realised that this 'gunsight' arrangement identified them as opposite sides of an entrance into the circle. Measurements by archaeoastronomer Clive Ruggles in 2019 revealed that the entrance faced towards the midsummer solstice sunset, similar to the famous orientation of Stonehenge.

A further surprise was our realisation that the diameter of Waun Mawn was the same as the diameter of the enclosing ditch around Stonehenge. As far as we know, no other Neolithic monument in Britain has this same diameter of 110 m. This remarkable coincidence provides a further link between the two circles of Waun Mawn and Stonehenge.

The OSL dates from packing deposits in Waun Mawn's stoneholes can be combined to produce a weighted probable date of construction of 3530+-330 bce (3860-3200 bce). The two dating methods together suggest that the Waun Mawn stone circle was constructed in 3400-3200 bce. With further analysis ongoing, the current evidence reveals that Waun Mawn was left unfinished, abandoned in mid-construction, since holes were prepared for stones that they never held. Of the standing stones that were put up, all but four were then dismantled, perhaps taken to Salisbury Plain to be erected in Stonehenge's first stage which began in 3080-2950 bce. There is a strong case that can be made for Stonehenge as a second-hand monument, constructed in its first stage out of bluestones that had graced Waun Mawn.

The Dance of the Giants?
There is the possibility that Waun Mawn could be the site of the Dance of the Giants. Its elevated location at 331 m OD on a high hill within the Preselis could qualify as a 'mountain'. The concordance of the stone circle's diameter, comparable to Stonehenge's Stage 1 enclosing ditch, echoes Geoffrey's words: 'erected... round the cemetery exactly as they had stood on Mount Killaraus in Ireland'. Yet other features do not coincide. Waun Mawn shows no sign of any 'baths' for collecting water among the stones; perhaps this section of the narrative was entirely invented to provide some justification for the medieval mind of why the stones were so important that they had to be moved such an extraordinary distance.

More can be said about the motivation behind the bluestones' movement. The legend's account of the stones being forcibly taken is contradicted by recent evidence of mobility among those buried at Stonehenge. Strontium isotope analysis of cremated bone can establish movement between geological zones. Analysis of 25 cremated individuals from Stonehenge has revealed that at least ten lived beyond the chalk of Salisbury Plain, four on geology consistent with that of southwest Wales. These four women and men are among the first people to have been buried at Stonehenge (since the latest of them dates to 3020-2900 bce). This pattern of movement among the people of Stonehenge suggests that some came with the bluestones, that the stones were brought by the Neolithic inhabitants of Preseli and not taken by the invading force of a Neolithic Uther Pendragon.

Conclusion: the longevity of oral tradition
The various concordances between legend and reality at Stonehenge might be entirely dismissed as no more than coincidence if we can be certain that oral traditions have little or no chance of lasting 4,000 years. An acceptable limit would seem to be 500 years in many cases. We have to conclude that, in the case of Stonehenge, an oral tradition surviving from around 3000-2500 bce until the twelfth century ce is most probably beyond the limits of survivable transmission.

For the time being, at least, we have to keep the legend separate from the archaeological evidence, even though, as the archaeologist Stuart Piggott observed long ago, they have intriguing points of correspondence which may just be too remarkable to be dismissed as mere coincidence (Piggott 1941, 306). On the one hand, Geoffrey's tale cannot be used to 'flesh out' the bones of the archaeological story. Yet on the other - just maybe - aspects of the legend might help us peer into the vanished world of prehistory.
